We’ve now invited
Brother and Sister Ortiz
from New Britain, Connecticut,
to visit our studio.
Brother Ortiz serves as an elder
and as a regular pioneer.
He’s had many additional privileges
of service over the years.
And Linnette has been regular pioneering
for over six years.
However, the reason we wanted
to talk with them is that thus far
they have successfully countered
Satan’s attacks on their family.
We’d like to hear
how they accomplished this.
First of all, Freddie,
tell us a little bit
about your family.
Neither Linnette nor I
were raised in the truth.
However, we met,
and we fell in love.
At that time,
marriage was not for me.
So we started
a romantic relationship for two years
before we started attending
the first meeting at the Kingdom Hall.
Soon thereafter,
we started studying the Bible;
and we took two studies per week;
we knew this was the truth.
But also we learned
how Jehovah sees immorality,
so we needed to do some changes.
Linnette’s parents
wanted her to continue
with her education,
so we needed to change our behavior.
So two years after,
we did the changes.
Number one
because we did love Jehovah.
Number two because we loved
what we were learning.
It was worth it
to follow Bible principles.
So two years later,
we got married
and we got baptized
—and we got married.
Very good.
So, Linnette, you were raised
without a knowledge of Jehovah God.
What changes did you both
have to make to ensure
your own family
would have a fine foundation
and be successful?
Well, prior to our baptism,
Freddie had a serious drinking problem.
And based on the way we were raised,
there was a lot of jealousy going on
and, I would say, a lack of confidence
and trust in each other.
My Bible teacher,
thankfully, suggested to us
to study the book
Making Your Family Life Happy.
And we ended up studying
that book twice.
That publication and the Bible principles
in it became the foundation
of our wonderful marriage
and the happy family we enjoy today.
Very nice.
So, Freddie, maybe you
can tell us about your children
and what they are doing
with their lives now.
We have two sons.
Gabriel, he’s the oldest one.
He started regular pioneering
when he was 14 years old.
At 18, he was appointed
as a ministerial servant.
At 22 years old, he has been working
in the Plumbing Department
at the Warwick construction
for more than two years.
Adrian is now 18 years old.
And he also started
regular pioneering when he was 14.
Currently, he handles
the accounts for the congregation
and other privileges as well.
Well, they both have had
an early start in their theocratic careers.
That’s commendable.
I’m sure you’re both
proud of them.
And we’re confident
that Jehovah,
the One “to whom
every family . . . owes its name,”
is pleased that they are giving
an answer to his taunter.
In addition
to the Family Life book,
what else contributed
to the success your family
has experienced, Linnette?
The Governing Body has provided us
with so many publications
with direction for families,
of course, all based on Jehovah’s Word.
So we decided early on that whenever
a question or an issue came up,
we would not make
any decision based on impulse.
Instead, we would research it
in the publications.
We pray to Jehovah
for him to give us wisdom.
And we even pray
for him to guide us
to find the right time to talk
to each other or to counsel the boys.
I have always heard
that there are stages
in the child’s life
and personality development.
So I researched in advance
as to what to expect.
In that way,
we were not surprised
when we saw changes
in attitudes or ideas.
And that helped us
realize what needed
to be addressed or corrected
as opposed to what was normal
for that stage
in the boys’ lives.
Very practical.
Freddie,
what can you add?
Over the years, I have learned
how essential it is to become a good listener
—also understanding.
I tell my family
how much I love them every day
because we never know
when circumstances might change.
Family worship
is very important for us.
I know it is easy to put off,
but the benefits are hard to beat.
Well,
before this arrangement started,
we as a family, we valued
the Bible study with the family.
I learned that a fetus
that is six months,
he can recognize
the family’s voice.
So I started a Bible study with my sons
when they were still in the womb . . .
Isn’t that nice.
. . . and continued
to do so after that.
I know that secular work
and other activities
can block
a regular program,
but we need to fight that tendency
if we want to succeed in family worship.
Very good.
Well, it seems your efforts
paid off when we consider
how well your family
has done spiritually
and the close relationship
you have with each other.
Now Linnette,
it sounds as if the family is perfect
—no challenges.
Is that the case?
No, not at all.
First Corinthians 10:13 says
that Christians will face
challenges
that are “common to [all] men.”
And we have faced the normal challenges
that come with raising a family.
The same verse indicates
that if we do things
Jehovah’s way,
we may increase the opportunity
for him to “make the way out” for us.
One unexpected challenge
that has changed
our family dynamics
over the years now,
was when Freddie
was diagnosed
with cancer in 2012.
The treatment was aggressive
and took its toll on his health.
Our whole lifestyle changed.
We had to move out
from our house . . .
Oh, boy.
. . . to an apartment,
we gave away our dog, Spike,
and we have to watch our expenses
really closely to keep going.
This could have put a lot
of strain in our family,
in our marriage,
and in our spirituality.
But, again, by praying to Jehovah constantly
and applying Bible principles,
I can say my marriage
and my family
have never been better.
Wow.
Spiritually, we kept our routine,
and we all stayed
in full-time service
throughout the ordeal.
The boys
have cooperated very well.
They have offered
to work to give us money.
But we prefer for them
to keep focused on the Kingdom
because we are confident
that Jehovah
will add on
to the things we need.
Freddie has been
a great example for all of us
because he pushes himself
to keep his spiritual routine.
You never see him
complaining or in a bad mood.
And that has been very inspiring
for the rest of the family.
Boy, that is quite a story.
You folks will certainly relate
to the convention drama video
that was advertised
on our April program.
Freddie, we’re very sorry to hear
about your physical condition.
Are there any
favorite scriptures that you use
to help keep you going spiritually
and to stay strong?
There are many of them.
Just to mention a few,
Philippians 4:6,7
has been my life since 2012,
where I have to pray
to Jehovah constantly
so that he can give me
the strength that I need
to overcome my health.
And also,
Philippians says
that he will give us
peace of mind.
In addition,
he will safeguard our heart.
And that’s something
I’ve been seeing from Jehovah.
Also, Isaiah 41:10 states:
“Do not be anxious,
for I am your God.”
Those words give me comfort
that he will keep on helping us
in these different circumstances
in our life.
I do understand that my wife has a lot
of responsibilities in the household,
so I had to reread
Proverbs 31
verses 10 to 31,
where it describes
all of the responsibility a good wife
might have to shoulder
for the family.
So Brother Morris,
she is my Proverbs 31 wife!
A good wife for sure.
You’ve obviously shown how much
you love and respect each other.
That’s commendable.
And your focus on being the best parents
you could be is a good example
for parents viewing
the program at this time.
This will come
as a surprise to you,
but we would like to invite your two sons
out to see what they remember
from growing up
in the family.
We have Gabriel
and Adrian with us.
Mom’s getting a little teary-eyed.
That’s understandable.
It was a surprise, see.
So Gabriel,
since you’re the oldest,
we will start with you.
What do you remember
about your family life,
first in Puerto Rico
and later here in the United States?
I remember faithfully going
to all the meetings and going out in service
every Saturday
—that was just the routine.
In Puerto Rico,
my dad had to work a lot though,
and like he said before,
that’s easy to get in the way
of a good family worship routine.
But I can honestly say that once we made
that transition of moving over here,
that helped us to have
a good family worship routine,
and it has helped us
to get closer and closer each day.
Now, isn’t that nice?
Now, Adrian, anything you can add
about the homelife?
Yeah, my mom
and dad have always
shown a great love for Jehovah
but also for each other.
So as kids,
you could just sense that.
So love and respect
is what we’ve always known.
Even now that my brother and I are older,
we have a great bond with each other.
We love each other and we can tell
each other everything about our lives.
And it’s due to that love
and respect that they have shown.
And even if there are disagreements,
which there are always going
to be disagreements
because it’s an imperfect family,
but that love is always there
to bridge those differences.
I also would like to add,
something that helped me a lot
was a routine
that my dad and I had
right before going to school;
we would always read the daily text.
And he would always say, “Behave,
and remember that Jehovah loves you.”
I don’t think he knows
how much that really helped me
go through
everyday challenges at school.
That’s priceless.
Now, very nice observations.
Gabriel, I’m interested
in understanding what prompted you
to regular pioneer
when you were only 14 years old?
It was at a point
where my dad lost his job.
Rather than stressing about it
—worrying about it
—he looked at things
with a spiritual perspective.
So he started to pioneer.
And since our schedules
matched perfectly,
I was his little pioneer buddy.
I would go out in service
with him whenever he needed it.
And I feel like if spiritual families,
you know, focus on spiritual matters,
it helps them
to become closer.
And I can’t imagine
how our relationship
and respect for one another
can be any better than what it is now.
Very nice.
Now, Adrian,
you began pioneering
when you were 14 as well.
How do you think
that affected you as a person?
Well, first of all,
the reason why I started pioneering
was because I was going out in service
with the rest of my family,
and since they were already pioneering,
I was getting the time in.
But I do think
that taking on the responsibility
of getting
at least 70 hours a month
in the service
does make you think differently
at 14 than it would have otherwise.
I think it has helped me
mature spiritually,
and it has contributed to me being used
to my full potential in the congregation.
And honestly, I wouldn’t trade it
for anything, well, maybe going to Bethel.
Gabriel, back to you.
Tell us what was it like
when you learned
that your dad
had a serious health problem
and would not be able to provide
for the family like he used to?
That was probably one
of the biggest challenges I have ever faced.
When my dad got diagnosed with cancer,
it was about the same time
that I got my call to Bethel.
And I was torn; I was divided.
I felt like if I was to go
to Bethel now,
it would be selfish of me
to leave my family at a time like that.
But my family
always had a spiritual view
on things and cited scriptures
like Matthew 6:33 constantly.
It helped me to see as a whole—as a family
—we put Kingdom interests first;
that Jehovah
was going to provide
because he’s a loving father
and friend.
And then my dad lost his job,
and again all these feelings came up.
But my family was adamant.
They let me know that the congregation
had been taking care of them
for months now,
and then doing some simplifying
on their own
helped them as well.
And I didn’t have to worry
about anything.
I do know that there’s a scripture that says
that we’ve got to take care of our own.
So I do anything I can
to help my family back home.
The only thing I hope
is that I can have a good faith
like they’ve shown
through these difficult times.
Well, thank all of you
for joining us.
I think all of us
are feeling that emotion
and feel very close
to you for sharing that.
Now, as a father, I can appreciate
all that Freddie is trying to do
as head of the family.
And, Linnette, your support
beyond normal
is very much
to be commended.
We can tell your family
is thriving spiritually,
and we pray Jehovah
will continue to bless your efforts,
come what may.
And we thank you,
Gabriel and Adrian,
for your surprise
to the studio.
Thank you very much
for taking the time to be interviewed.
Thank you for the privilege.
Thank you.